Connection:
    A network connection, e,g, a TCP/IP socket connection.

Channel:
    A bi-directional stream of communications between two AMQP peers. A single connection can carry multiple channels.

Client:
    The initiator of an AMQP connection or channel. Clients produce and consume messages while servers queue and route messages.

Server:
    The process that accepts client connections and implements the AMQP message queueing and routing functions. Also known as "broker".

Peer:
    Either party in an AMQP connection. An AMQP connection involves exactly two peers (one is the client, one is the server).

Frame:
    A formally-defined package of connection data. Frames are always written and read contiguously - as a single unit - on the connection.

Protocol class:
    A collection of AMQP commands (also known as Methods) that deal with a specific type of functionality.

Methods:
    A specific type of AMQP command frame that passes instructions from one peer to the other.

Content:
    Application data passed from client to server and from server to client. The term is synonymous with "message".

Content header:
    A specific type of frame that describes a content's properties.

Content body:
    A specific type of frame that contains raw application data. Content body frames are entirely opaque - the server does not examine or modify these in any way.

Exchange:
    The entity within the server which receives messages from producer applications and optionally routes these to message queues within the server.

Exchange type:
    The algorithm and implementation of a particular model of exchange. In contrast to the "exchange instance", which is the entity that receives and routes messages within the server.
    The relationship between "exchange type" and "exchange instance" is similar to "class" and "instance"

Message queue:
    A named entity that holds messages and forwards them to consumer applications.

Binding:
    An entity that creates a relationship between a message queue and an exchange.

Routing key:
    A virtual address that an exchange may use to decide how to route a specific message.

Durable:
    A server resource that survives a server restart.

Transient:
    A server resource or message that is wiped or reset after a server restart.

Persistent:
    A message that the server holds on reliable disk storage and MUST NOT lose after a server restart.

Consumer:
    A client application that requests messages from a message queue.

Producer:
    A client application that publishes messages to an exchange.

* Virtual host:
    A collection of exchanges, message queues and associated objects.
    Virtual hosts are independent server domains that share a common authentication and encryption environment.

Assertion:
    A condition that must be true for processing to continue.

Exception:
    A failed assertion, handled by closing either the Channel or the Connection.




MeaningLess terms within the context of AMQP

Topic:
    Usually a means of distributing messages; AMQP implements topics using one or more types of exchange.

Subscription:
    Usually a request to receive data from topics; AMQP implements subscriptions as message queues and bindings.

Service:
    Usually synonymous with server. AMQP uses "server" to conform with IETF standard nomenclature.

Broker:
    sysnonymouse with server.

Router:
    Sometimes used to describe the actions of an exchange. Exchanges can also as message end-points, and "router" has special significance in the network domain, so AMQP does not use it.